KEP-2570: update v1.36 memory protection details (#5977)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/2570-memory-qos/README.md

Reviewer: It should be `memoryReservationPolicy: None`

2. **memory.min stability concerns need benchmark validation**: Mapping `requests.memory` to `memory.min` could impact node stability under memory pressure if too much memory is protected for pods. The design mitigates this by also setting `memory.min` for kube-reserved and system-reserved cgroups when `--enforce-node-allocatable` is configured. The scheduler ensures `sum(requests) ≤ allocatable`, and the kernel invokes OOM killer (not hang) when `memory.min` cannot be satisfied. Benchmark testing under sustained memory pressure is needed to validate this before Beta.

3. **Scope consolidation**: The Alpha v3 iteration adds `memoryReservationPolicy` for independent memory reservation control, new observability metrics, a kernel version check to mitigate livelock issues, and documented failure modes—addressing the gaps identified since the v1.28 Beta attempt was cancelled.

### Future Considerations (Beta candidates)

> 1. **Tiered memory protection follow-up (BestEffort)**: Alpha v1.36 already uses `memory.min` for Guaranteed and `memory.low` for Burstable. A potential follow-up for later phases is evaluating whether BestEffort-specific `memory.low` memory protection should be added. Tracked in [kubernetes/kubernetes#131077](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/131077)

Author: Removed the whole section `Fture Considerations (Beta candidates)`. The benchmark testing is already properly documented in the "Beta Graduation" section

| -------- | -------- |

> | memory.min | memory.min specifies a minimum amount of memory the cgroup must always retain, i.e., memory that can never be reclaimed by the system. This protects the cgroup's memory from reclaim pressure. If the system cannot free enough memory because too much is protected by memory.min across cgroups, the OOM killer will be invoked. **We map it to `requests.memory`.** |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| memory.min | memory.min specifies a minimum amount of memory the cgroup must always retain, i.e., memory that can never be reclaimed by the system. This protects the cgroup's memory from reclaim pressure. If the system cannot free enough memory because too much is protected by memory.min across cgroups, the OOM killer will be invoked. **We map it to requests.memory for Guaranteed pods. Burstable pods use memory.low instead (see below).** |
```

**Changes from Alpha v1.27:**
- No changes to memory.high formula
- Kubelet adds a kernel version check for 5.9+ to mitigate the livelock issue. If the kernel version < 5.9, the Kubelet logs a warning because such kernels may exhibit livelocks at `memory.high`.
- Burstable pod/container request protection now uses `memory.low`, while Guaranteed continues to use `memory.min`.
- Add node-level metrics for observability:

>   - `kubelet_memory_qos_node_memory_min_bytes`: Gauge for total cgroup v2 `memory.min` in bytes for Guaranteed pods.

Reviewer: Add a note here saying _The kubepods root cgroup memory.min is set to guaranteed + burstable requests (parent must cover children's protection), but this metric reports only the Guaranteed portion._

- `memoryReservationPolicy` (enum, default `None`): Controls whether request protection is applied. Set to `TieredReservation` to enable `memory.min` for Guaranteed and `memory.low` for Burstable workloads.

### Mapping Rules
#### Container/Pod
![](./memory-high.png)
1. If container sets `requests.memory`, we set `memory.min=pod.spec.containers[i].resources.requests[memory]` for `Guaranteed` container level cgroups, and `memory.low=pod.spec.containers[i].resources.requests[memory]` for `Burstable` container level cgroups
2. If any containers in pod set `requests.memory`, we set pod-level memory protection as `memory.min=sum(pod.spec.containers[i].resources.requests[memory])` for `Guaranteed` pods, and `memory.low=sum(pod.spec.containers[i].resources.requests[memory])` for `Burstable` pods
3. If container sets `limits.memory`, we set `memory.high=floor[(requests.memory + memoryThrottlingFactor * (limits.memory - requests.memory))/pageSize] * pageSize` for container level cgroup if `memory.high>memory.min`
4. If container doesn't set `limits.memory`, we substitute `node allocatable memory` for `limits.memory` in the formula above

> 5. If kubelet sets `--cgroups-per-qos=true`, we set `memory.min=sum(pod[i].spec.containers[j].resources.requests[memory])` (where pod[i] is a Guaranteed or Burstable pod) on the Guaranteed QoS ancestor cgroup, and `memory.low=sum(pod[i].spec.containers[j].resources.requests[memory])` (where pod[i] is a Burstable pod) on the Burstable QoS ancestor cgroup to make ancestor propagation effective

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. If kubelet sets `--cgroups-per-qos=true`, the kubepods root cgroup sets memory.min = sum(guaranteed_requests) + sum(burstable_requests) so the parent covers both hard and soft protection for its children. The Burstable QoS cgroup sets memory.low = sum(burstable_requests) for soft protection
```

Container/Pod (cgroupfs format):
```
// Container
/cgroup2/kubepods/pod<UID>/<container-id>/memory.min=pod.spec.containers[i].resources.requests[memory] // Guaranteed
/cgroup2/kubepods/burstable/pod<UID>/<container-id>/memory.low=pod.spec.containers[i].resources.requests[memory] // Burstable
/cgroup2/kubepods/burstable/pod<UID>/<container-id>/memory.high=floor[(requests.memory + memoryThrottlingFactor * (limits.memory - requests.memory))/pageSize] * pageSize // Burstable
// Pod
/cgroup2/kubepods/pod<UID>/memory.min=sum(pod.spec.containers[i].resources.requests[memory]) // Guaranteed
/cgroup2/kubepods/burstable/pod<UID>/memory.low=sum(pod.spec.containers[i].resources.requests[memory]) // Burstable
// QoS ancestor cgroups
/cgroup2/kubepods/memory.min=sum(guaranteed_requests + burstable_requests)  // parent covers all children
/cgroup2/kubepods/burstable/memory.low=sum(burstable_pod_requests)          // soft protection

> /cgroup2/kubepods/burstable/memory.min=0

Reviewer: The kubelet never writes this. On upstream master, `setMemoryQoS()` sets `Cgroup2MemoryMin` on `v1.PodQOSGuaranteed` and `Cgroup2MemoryLow` on `v1.PodQOSBurstable`. It never writes `memory.min` to the burstable QoS cgroup. The value is 0 by kernel default. Either remove this line or annotate: `// kernel default, not explicitly written`.

```

Node:
```
/cgroup2/<kube-reserved-cgroup,system-reserved-cgroup>/memory.min=<kube-reserved,system-reserved>
```

### Cgroup v2 Support

> After Kubernetes v1.19, kubelet can identify cgroups v2 and do the conversion. Since [v1.0.0-rc93](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/releases/tag/v1.0.0-rc93), runc supports `Unified` to pass through cgroups v2 parameters. So we use this variable to pass cgroup v2 memory knobs when cgroups v2 mode is detected. In Alpha v1.36, kubelet also warns if MemoryQoS is enabled on kernels older than 5.9.

Reviewer 2: `In Alpha 1.36` is worded oddly considering the first sentence says `After kubernetes v1.19`. Maybe just `After Kubernetes 1.36,...`?

Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
automations, so be extremely careful here.
-->

> Yes, the kubelet will set `memory.min` for Guaranteed pod/container level cgroups and `memory.low` for Burstable pod/container level cgroups. It also sets `memory.high` for burstable and best effort containers, which may slow memory allocation when usage reaches `memory.high`. `memory.min/memory.low` for QoS level cgroup will be set when `--cgroups-per-qos` is satisfied. `memory.min` for node level cgroups will be set when `--enforce-node-allocatable` is satisfied.

Reviewer: Nit: the implementation only sets memory.min on the Guaranteed (kubepods root) QoS cgroup and memory.low on the Burstable QoS cgroup and not both keys on both cgroups. Should say: `memory.min on the kubepods  root QoS cgroup and memory.low on the Burstable QoS cgroup will be set when --cgroups-per-qos is satisfied.`

> ###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

Reviewer: We might need to fill this information.

- `memoryThrottlingFactor` (float, default 0.9): Controls memory.high calculation

> - `memoryReservationPolicy` (enum, default `None`): Controls whether memory.min is set

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `memoryReservationPolicy` (enum, default `None`): Controls whether memory protection is applied. Set to TieredReservation to enable memory.min for Guaranteed and memory.low for Burstable workloads.
```

are missing a bunch of machinery and tooling and can't do that now.
-->
Yes. Manual testing was performed:
- Upgrade: Enabling `MemoryQoS`, `memoryReservationPolicy: TieredReservation` on a running kubelet correctly sets `memory.min`/`memory.low`/`memory.high` on new pods and updates node-level cgroups
- Rollback: disabling MemoryQoS stops new MemoryQoS writes; cleanup/reset of existing values is not currently implemented.

> - Upgrade->downgrade->upgrade: Cgroup values are correctly reconciled in each state; no orphaned settings observed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Upgrade->downgrade->upgrade: On re-enable, cgroup values are correctly reconciled; stale values from the prior enable cycle are overwritten.
```

logs or events for this purpose.
-->

> An operator could run ls `/sys/fs/cgroup/kubepods.slice/kubepods-burstable.slice/kubepods-burstable-pod<SOME_ID>.slice` on a node with cgroupv2 enabled to confirm the presence of `memory.min` (Guaranteed) and `memory.low` (Burstable) files, which indicates that the feature is in use by workloads.

Reviewer: >confirm the presence of memory.min (Guaranteed) and memory.low (Burstable) files 

These cgroup files always exist on cgroups v2 I think their presence doesn't indicate the feature is in use. The check should be whether their values are non-zero:                                                  cat /sys/fs/cgroup/kubepods.slice/kubepods-burstable.slice/kubepods-burstable-pod<UID>.slice/memory.low If it returns a value > 0, the feature is active.

  - Testing: Feature detection skips MemoryQoS on cgroups v1 systems

- **Runtime doesn't support unified map**
  - Detection: memory.min/memory.low/memory.high not set despite feature enabled
  - Mitigations: Upgrade containerd to 1.6+ or CRI-O to 1.22+
  - Diagnostics: Check runtime version; compare CRI request (kubelet logs -v=6) with actual cgroup values

- **Cgroups v2 available but kernel < 5.9**
  - Detection: Workloads hitting memory.high may exhibit livelock (high CPU, no progress, near-zero memory allocation rate)
  - Mitigations: Upgrade kernel to 5.9+ or disable feature gate
  - Diagnostics: Check kernel version with `uname -r`; kernels 4.5-5.8 have cgroups v2 but lack the livelock fix
  - Note: Kubelet logs a startup warning when MemoryQoS is enabled with kernels older than 5.9.

> - **Systemd unit property side effects during QoS reconciliation**

Reviewer: Also, add this:
```sh
   - Mitigations: Disable MemoryQoS feature gate, or set `memoryReservationPolicy: None`                                                                                                                          
      to stop QoS cgroup reconciliation writes. See kubernetes/kubernetes#138431.
```
